README.md, before:

# Arbitrum BOLD Validator Starter Kit

This repository is for those in the community who wish to run a BOLD validator on the public testnet to see BOLD in action. Make sure to also check out the [BOLD testnet status page](https://status-bold.vercel.app/) to see the number of on-going challenges and validators on the network! In this repository, you will find two Docker Compose files for spinning up a BOLD validator for Arbitrum chains, in two different modes: honest and evil. 

The validator that gets deployed will be validating transactions on the public BOLD testnet and will: post to, monitor for, and challenge invalid state assertions on Ethereum Sepolia. In other words, this BOLD testnet is an L2. To simulate traffic on the testnet, a transaction spammer (1 txn/10s) is used. 

## Step 1: Prepare pre-requisites
- Install and start [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) locally and ensure you have Docker Compose (you can verify this by running `docker compose version` which should return the version of Docker Compose you are running)
- Download and install [Jq](https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/)
- An **Ethereum Sepolia** testnet account with at least 100 Sepolia ETH to stake on assertions, and therefore, open challenges. 
- An RPC connection to Ethereum Sepolia. We recommend using your own Ethereum Sepolia node to avoid potential rate limits imposed by 3rd party providers
- Ensure your machine has, at minimum, 8 GB of RAM and 4 CPU cores (if using AWS, we recommend a `t3 xLarge`)

## Step 2: Define environment variables
The following environment variables are required to run the commands below:
- `SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT`: An Ethereum node RPC endpoint for running your validator. **If running a node on localhost on MacOS, this must be set to `http://host.docker.internal:$PORT`**
- `HONEST_PRIVATE_KEY` and/or `EVIL_PRIVATE_KEY`: an Ethereum private key **without a 0x prefix** as a hex string. For example, if your private key is `0xabc123`, please use `abc123`.
    - Note: You may use the same private key for either of these variables if you are only running 1 validator. If you plan to run 2 validators simultaneously, it is recommended that you use 2 different private keys.

## Step 3: Clone the repository & pull Docker images
Be sure to clone this repository locally and start from the working directory:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold-validator-starter-kit.git
cd bold-validator-starter-kit
```

Next, pull the Docker images down:
```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/rauljordan/nitro:bold && docker pull ghcr.io/rauljordan/bold-utils:latest
```

## Step 4: Fund your validator 
Next, mint and fund your validator with the stake token on Sepolia (the stake token is an ERC20). If you are running a node on your localhost, make sure your `SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT` environment variable is set to: `http://host.docker.internal:<PORT>` where `<PORT>` is the port where its http server is running. By default, this is 8545.
```
./mint_stake_token.sh --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```
By running this command, the ERC20 staking token will be minted using the Sepolia ETH. This will allow the validator to stake on assertions and open challenges to assertions it observes (and disagrees with).

Note: You may use the same private key to fund the honest and evil validator. However, if you plan to run 2 validators simultaneously, it is recommended that you use 2 different private keys.

## Step 5: Run your validator
You can choose to run either an honest or an evil BOLD validator, or both. If you are running a node on your localhost, make sure your `SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT` environment variable is set to: `http://host.docker.internal:<PORT>` where `<PORT>` is the port where its http server is running. By default, this is 8545.

### Honest Validator
To start your validator, run:
```
./validator.sh --private-key $HONEST_PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```

### Evil Validator
To start your validator, but in evil mode, simply run the same command as above but with the `--evil` flag:
```
./validator.sh --evil --private-key $EVIL_PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```

Congratulations! You've now funded and started a BOLD validator. At first, there may be some `ERROR` log lines. Rest assured that this is expected at first as it takes some time (~5 minutes) for the node to catch up with the chain's latest state. This means that the node will attempt to post assertions and challenge observed assertions that it does not agree with, but will fail to do so until the node is synced up. You will know the node is synced up when you see log lines that contain messages such as: `"Successfully submitted assertion"`.

## How Evil Validators Work
By default, evil validators will intercept all Arbitrum deposit transactions to the inbox that have a value of 7,777,777 gwei, or 0.0078 ETH. To modify the amount to intercept, change **all instances** of `evil-intercept-deposit-gwei` in your `evil-validator/evil_validator_config.json` to a different amount of gwei. If you want to bridge some ETH to the inbox with a value that will be intercepted, you can run:

```
./bridge_eth.sh --gwei-to-deposit 7777777 --private-key $EVIL_PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```

The above will send an ETH deposit to the Arbitrum inbox contract of 7,777,777 gwei, which is the default value the evil validator is configured to maliciously tweak.

## Key log lines
Below are a few log lines that can help you follow along with any on-going challenges:
* `"Posting assertion for batch we agree with"` - posting of a state assertion that your node believes to be correct
* `"Disagreed with an observed assertion onchain"` - your validator has arrived at a state that is different from one that was asserted by another party on-chain
* `"Opening a challenge on an observed assertion"` - marks the beginning of a dispute over an asserted state between your node and another party
* `"Successfully submitted assertion"` - submission of an assertion as part of the multi-level, interactive dispute protocol
* `"Observed an evil edge created onchain from an adversary, will make necessary moves on it"` - your validator has observed that the counter party has made a move and will be responding with a bisection assertion next
* `"Now tracking challenge edge locally and making moves"` - your validator is now dissecting the history commitments as part of the multi-level, interactive dispute protocol
* `"Updated edge timer"` - when the validator is finished making it's move, a "timer" is started so that if the counter party does not respond before the challenge period is over, the entity who made the last move will have their assertion confirmed automatically.
* `"Confirmed assertion by time` - this happens when an assertion, made as part of a challenge, gets confirmed automatically because the counter party failed to submit a rival challenge assertion within the fixed challenge period time window.
* `"Confirmed assertion by challenge win"` - this log line indicates that a challenge over an asserted state has been resolved, with the honest party "winning" the dispute and confirming the asserted state. This happens after a one-step proof is submitted to Ethereum to determine the winner.
* `"Assertion with hash 0xf9be2a92 needs at least 50150 blocks before being confirmable, waiting for 167h10m0s"` - this log line indicates that a given assertion will be confirmed automatically via time if there are no challenges open against it
* `"Observed an honest challenge edge created onchain, now tracking it locally"` - this log line gets printed when your validator observes a challenge edge that it agrees on - no challenge will be opened since it agrees on the asserted state made by the other party.

## Troubleshooting and what some log lines mean:
There may be periods of time where there are no logs being printed when running an honest validator. This is normal and totally fine because it means that there are no invalid state assertions observed, and therefore, no on-going challenges. If useful, the RPC port for the honest validator is `8247` while the RPC port for the evil validator is `8947`.

Arbitrum BOLD is currently in `alpha` and is still being actively developed on. As such, below are the explanation behind a few errors and log lines that may arise during testing. Many of the log lines below are expected and indicate healthy, expected behavior of your BOLD validator.
* `Could not succeed function after retries package=retry retryCount=1 err="chain catching up` - This is expected when first starting up your validator. As mentioned earlier, this log line simply indicates that the validator is not yet fully synced up with the latest state of the testnet. This should eventually disappear after some time (~5 minutes or sooner)
* `Could not succeed function after retries package=retry retryCount=1 err="could not add edge to challenge tree: could not check history commitment agreement for edge: 0xd37b29c62d55d8a6b2fe8f288b9e6a5914bf817edba1af5af894d8b9cb7e985a: accumulator not found: no metadata for batch 5447"` - while rare, this most likely is a result of the validator node not being synced up yet to the latest state of the testnet. The retry logic will eventually ensure that your validator can succesfully add edges to the challenge tree and check history committments. 
* `InboxTracker` - posted at regular intervals, this log line is simply printing some metadata about the current state
* `No available batch to post as assertion, waiting for more batches` - because validators will try to post an assertion every hour, there may be times where there is not enough batches to post an assertion. This could be because of a variety of reasons, such as low txn volume. The retry logic will ensure that eventually an assertion gets posted successfully once there are enough batches to do so.
* `error opening parent chain wallet        path=/home/user/.arbitrum/local/wallet account= err="invalid hex character 'x' in private key"` - this log line will get printed if the private key you provide contains the `0x` prefix. Please remove the `0x` prefix before supplying the `validator.sh` script with the key!
* `err="invalid block range params"` or `err="unsupported block number"` - this can be resolved by wiping the validator database (instructions below)
* `err="execution reverted: ERC20: insufficient allowance"` or `error="could not create assertion: test execution of tx errored before sending payable tx: execution reverted: ERC20: insufficient allowance"` - this happens when your validator has exhausted the entire supply of the ERC20 staking token minted when you ran `./mint_stake_token.sh`. Simply re-run the same command to mint more staking tokens

### How to wipe the validator database

If the node db gets corrupted for some reason (bad shutdown, for example), you may need to wipe the node's database. To do so, use the below commands (depending on the type of validator you're running):
```
docker volume rm $(docker volume ls -q | grep "honest-validator") 2>/dev/null
docker volume rm $(docker volume ls -q | grep "evil-validator") 2>/dev/null
```

Commit message:

add note about relative honest/evil assertions

README.md, after:

# Arbitrum BOLD Validator Starter Kit

This repository is for those in the community who wish to run a BOLD validator on the public testnet to see BOLD in action. Make sure to also check out the [BOLD testnet status page](https://status-bold.vercel.app/) to see the number of on-going challenges and validators on the network! In this repository, you will find two Docker Compose files for spinning up a BOLD validator for Arbitrum chains, in two different modes: honest and evil. 

The validator that gets deployed will be validating transactions on the public BOLD testnet and will: post to, monitor for, and challenge invalid state assertions on Ethereum Sepolia. In other words, this BOLD testnet is an L2. To simulate traffic on the testnet, a transaction spammer (1 txn/10s) is used. 

## Step 1: Prepare pre-requisites
- Install and start [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) locally and ensure you have Docker Compose (you can verify this by running `docker compose version` which should return the version of Docker Compose you are running)
- Download and install [Jq](https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/)
- An **Ethereum Sepolia** testnet account with at least 100 Sepolia ETH to stake on assertions, and therefore, open challenges. 
- An RPC connection to Ethereum Sepolia. We recommend using your own Ethereum Sepolia node to avoid potential rate limits imposed by 3rd party providers
- Ensure your machine has, at minimum, 8 GB of RAM and 4 CPU cores (if using AWS, we recommend a `t3 xLarge`)

## Step 2: Define environment variables
The following environment variables are required to run the commands below:
- `SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT`: An Ethereum node RPC endpoint for running your validator. **If running a node on localhost on MacOS, this must be set to `http://host.docker.internal:$PORT`**
- `HONEST_PRIVATE_KEY` and/or `EVIL_PRIVATE_KEY`: an Ethereum private key **without a 0x prefix** as a hex string. For example, if your private key is `0xabc123`, please use `abc123`.
    - Note: You may use the same private key for either of these variables if you are only running 1 validator. If you plan to run 2 validators simultaneously, it is recommended that you use 2 different private keys.

## Step 3: Clone the repository & pull Docker images
Be sure to clone this repository locally and start from the working directory:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold-validator-starter-kit.git
cd bold-validator-starter-kit
```

Next, pull the Docker images down:
```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/rauljordan/nitro:bold && docker pull ghcr.io/rauljordan/bold-utils:latest
```

## Step 4: Fund your validator 
Next, mint and fund your validator with the stake token on Sepolia (the stake token is an ERC20). If you are running a node on your localhost, make sure your `SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT` environment variable is set to: `http://host.docker.internal:<PORT>` where `<PORT>` is the port where its http server is running. By default, this is 8545.
```
./mint_stake_token.sh --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```
By running this command, the ERC20 staking token will be minted using the Sepolia ETH. This will allow the validator to stake on assertions and open challenges to assertions it observes (and disagrees with).

Note: You may use the same private key to fund the honest and evil validator. However, if you plan to run 2 validators simultaneously, it is recommended that you use 2 different private keys.

## Step 5: Run your validator
You can choose to run either an honest or an evil BOLD validator, or both. If you are running a node on your localhost, make sure your `SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT` environment variable is set to: `http://host.docker.internal:<PORT>` where `<PORT>` is the port where its http server is running. By default, this is 8545.

### Honest Validator
To start your validator, run:
```
./validator.sh --private-key $HONEST_PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```

### Evil Validator
To start your validator, but in evil mode, simply run the same command as above but with the `--evil` flag:
```
./validator.sh --evil --private-key $EVIL_PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```

Congratulations! You've now funded and started a BOLD validator. At first, there may be some `ERROR` log lines. Rest assured that this is expected at first as it takes some time (~5 minutes) for the node to catch up with the chain's latest state. This means that the node will attempt to post assertions and challenge observed assertions that it does not agree with, but will fail to do so until the node is synced up. You will know the node is synced up when you see log lines that contain messages such as: `"Successfully submitted assertion"`.

## How Evil Validators Work
By default, evil validators will intercept all Arbitrum deposit transactions to the inbox that have a value of 7,777,777 gwei, or 0.0078 ETH. To modify the amount to intercept, change **all instances** of `evil-intercept-deposit-gwei` in your `evil-validator/evil_validator_config.json` to a different amount of gwei. If you want to bridge some ETH to the inbox with a value that will be intercepted, you can run:

```
./bridge_eth.sh --gwei-to-deposit 7777777 --private-key $EVIL_PRIVATE_KEY --eth-rpc-endpoint $SEPOLIA_ENDPOINT
```

The above will send an ETH deposit to the Arbitrum inbox contract of 7,777,777 gwei, which is the default value the evil validator is configured to maliciously tweak.

## Interpreting key log lines
Note that when running a validator, the use of the term `evil` and `honest` in the logs are _relative_ to your validator node. In other words, your validator will always consider assertions that it agrees with to be `honest` assertions. Likewise, any assertion that your validator node disagrees with is considered `evil`. 

Below are a few log lines that can help you follow along with any on-going challenges:
* `"Posting assertion for batch we agree with"` - posting of a state assertion that your node believes to be correct
* `"Disagreed with an observed assertion onchain"` - your validator has arrived at a state that is different from one that was asserted by another party on-chain
* `"Opening a challenge on an observed assertion"` - marks the beginning of a dispute over an asserted state between your node and another party
* `"Successfully submitted assertion"` - submission of an assertion as part of the multi-level, interactive dispute protocol
* `"Observed an evil edge created onchain from an adversary, will make necessary moves on it"` - your validator has observed that the counter party has made a move and will be responding with a bisection assertion next
* `"Now tracking challenge edge locally and making moves"` - your validator is now dissecting the history commitments as part of the multi-level, interactive dispute protocol
* `"Updated edge timer"` - when the validator is finished making it's move, a "timer" is started so that if the counter party does not respond before the challenge period is over, the entity who made the last move will have their assertion confirmed automatically.
* `"Confirmed assertion by time` - this happens when an assertion, made as part of a challenge, gets confirmed automatically because the counter party failed to submit a rival challenge assertion within the fixed challenge period time window.
* `"Confirmed assertion by challenge win"` - this log line indicates that a challenge over an asserted state has been resolved, with the honest party "winning" the dispute and confirming the asserted state. This happens after a one-step proof is submitted to Ethereum to determine the winner.
* `"Assertion with hash 0xf9be2a92 needs at least 50150 blocks before being confirmable, waiting for 167h10m0s"` - this log line indicates that a given assertion will be confirmed automatically via time if there are no challenges open against it
* `"Observed an honest challenge edge created onchain, now tracking it locally"` - this log line gets printed when your validator observes a challenge edge that it agrees on - no challenge will be opened since it agrees on the asserted state made by the other party.

## Troubleshooting and what some log lines mean:
There may be periods of time where there are no logs being printed when running an honest validator. This is normal and totally fine because it means that there are no invalid state assertions observed, and therefore, no on-going challenges. If useful, the RPC port for the honest validator is `8247` while the RPC port for the evil validator is `8947`.

Arbitrum BOLD is currently in `alpha` and is still being actively developed on. As such, below are the explanation behind a few errors and log lines that may arise during testing. Many of the log lines below are expected and indicate healthy, expected behavior of your BOLD validator.
* `Could not succeed function after retries package=retry retryCount=1 err="chain catching up` - This is expected when first starting up your validator. As mentioned earlier, this log line simply indicates that the validator is not yet fully synced up with the latest state of the testnet. This should eventually disappear after some time (~5 minutes or sooner)
* `Could not succeed function after retries package=retry retryCount=1 err="could not add edge to challenge tree: could not check history commitment agreement for edge: 0xd37b29c62d55d8a6b2fe8f288b9e6a5914bf817edba1af5af894d8b9cb7e985a: accumulator not found: no metadata for batch 5447"` - while rare, this most likely is a result of the validator node not being synced up yet to the latest state of the testnet. The retry logic will eventually ensure that your validator can succesfully add edges to the challenge tree and check history committments. 
* `InboxTracker` - posted at regular intervals, this log line is simply printing some metadata about the current state
* `No available batch to post as assertion, waiting for more batches` - because validators will try to post an assertion every hour, there may be times where there is not enough batches to post an assertion. This could be because of a variety of reasons, such as low txn volume. The retry logic will ensure that eventually an assertion gets posted successfully once there are enough batches to do so.
* `error opening parent chain wallet        path=/home/user/.arbitrum/local/wallet account= err="invalid hex character 'x' in private key"` - this log line will get printed if the private key you provide contains the `0x` prefix. Please remove the `0x` prefix before supplying the `validator.sh` script with the key!
* `err="invalid block range params"` or `err="unsupported block number"` - this can be resolved by wiping the validator database (instructions below)
* `err="execution reverted: ERC20: insufficient allowance"` or `error="could not create assertion: test execution of tx errored before sending payable tx: execution reverted: ERC20: insufficient allowance"` - this happens when your validator has exhausted the entire supply of the ERC20 staking token minted when you ran `./mint_stake_token.sh`. Simply re-run the same command to mint more staking tokens

### How to wipe the validator database

If the node db gets corrupted for some reason (bad shutdown, for example), you may need to wipe the node's database. To do so, use the below commands (depending on the type of validator you're running):
```
docker volume rm $(docker volume ls -q | grep "honest-validator") 2>/dev/null
docker volume rm $(docker volume ls -q | grep "evil-validator") 2>/dev/null
```
